Update money & taxes (#38)
EPIC-guide/epic-guide.github.io: _life/money.md

order: 9
---

The short version:

> - PhD students get paid around 55k CHF/year, with small yearly increases, and paystubs are available on the internal [SESAME](https://sesame2.epfl.ch) tool.

Author: I assume the former redirects to the latter now? It was the old pre-SAP tool, it no longer exists any more. (But now that I'm no longer a PhD student accred-wise I can't check...)

- Get your bank's [TWINT](https://www.twint.ch/en/) app to easily send and receive money using phone numbers, you typically won't need a credit card.
- You automatically save money for retirement as an employee in Switzerland, and you can save extra money in a "3a pillar" account which is tax-deductible up to a limit.
- If you are on a B permit _and_ you make less than 120k _and_ your wealth is under 50k _and_ you have no undeclared revenue, taxes are taken automatically from your salary and you need not worry about them.
- If you do not meet the criteria above, or if you have special deductions such as a 3a pillar or withheld taxes from investments or savings, you need to explicitly file your taxes, see below.

## Pay

The pay for PhD students is set at the federal level subject to the approval of the ETH council.
As of 2024, it is 54,550 CHF/year for the first year, and increases by 1,000 CHF/year in each of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th years
([source](https://www.epfl.ch/campus/services/human-resources/en/basic-starting-salary-of-doctoral-assistants-and-postdocs/)).

> The main unusual factor is the "13th salary" system: your salary is divided into 13, not 12, parts,
> and the extra 1/13th being given to you partly in November and partly in December.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main unusual factor is the "13th salary" system: you receive 1/13th of your annual salary every month, not 1/12th, and the last 1/13th is given to you partly in November and partly in December.
```

The origins of this system are historically not so clear, but nowadays it’s basically a way for you to pay for Christmas presents and such.
If you did not work the whole year, for instance because you started in September, or because you did an internship in the summer,
the 13th salary is adjusted proportionally.

Overall, expect to get around 3,200 CHF/month after all taxes starting in the first year, plus the 13th salary.
Here’s an example breakdown for a first year monthly PhD student salary, for a non-November/December month (see above), **as of January 2023** (the amounts may have slightly changed since then):

| Gross salary             | 4194.65 CHF |
| First pillar (AVS)       | -222.30 CHF  |
| Various other deductions | -83.75 CHF   |
| Second pillar (Publica)  | -152.70 CHF  |
| Income tax               | -251.25 CHF  |
| **Net income**           | **3484.65 CHF** |

Note that the 1,000 CHF/year increment:

> * applies every *calendar* year, not "PhD year", three times in total;

Reviewer: The "and" makes a semantic difference. Without it, this _could_ be parsed as 'three times in total every calendar year'.

55,432 CHF. If there is then a 2% adjustment for 2026, your annual salary for
2026 will be (55,432 + 1,000) + 2% = 57,561 CHF.

There is one slightly unusual factor to take into account: the 13th salary.
The 13th salary system means that you get 1/13th of your annual salary each month,
with the last 1/13th being given to you partly in November and partly in December.
The origins of this system are historically not so clear, but nowadays it’s basically a way for you to pay for Christmas presents and such.

Overall, expect to get around 3,200 CHF/month after all taxes starting in the first year, plus the 13th salary.
Here’s an example breakdown for a first year monthly PhD student salary, for a non-November/December month (see above), **as of January 2023** (the amounts may have slightly changed since then):

| Gross salary             | 4194.65 CHF |
| First pillar (AVS)       | -222.30 CHF  |
| Various other deductions | -83.75 CHF   |
| Second pillar (Publica)  | -152.70 CHF  |
| Income tax               | -251.25 CHF  |
| **Net income**           | **3484.65 CHF** |

## Banks

> Go with whichever Swiss bank you want, they're all more or less equal, and will have free accounts for students. The main question is whether you want a more traditional account or an app-based one like CSX or Yuh.

Reviewer: Do you think it's worth keeping a sentence (either here or in the summary at the top) about saving a few francs with an app-only bank?

Author: done

While you technically can cash checks, banks will charge large fees for doing so, as virtually no one in Switzerland uses checks any more.

## Internships in the US

The most likely complication in your personal finances will be if you do an internship in the US.
Luckily, this guide has you covered with [banking, taxes, and other advice](/life/money-americans#internships-in-the-us-for-non-citizens) for that circumstance.

> 

Reviewer: spurious diff?

Author: I didn't like how the link was cut across lines. :p

## Retirement

> Switzerland has a system based on three pillars: shared mandatory, personal mandatory, and personal optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switzerland has a retirement savings system based on three pillars: shared mandatory, personal mandatory, and personal optional.
```

> The first pillar is mandatory retirement savings, taken out of the salary, as a global pool for everyone. Called "AVS", equivalent to "social security".

Reviewer: Well, it's not "global", is it, if it's only for Switzerland. Also the second sentence is not a sentence.

> The secpond pillar is also mandatory retirement savings, taken out of the salary, but for yourself.
> The provider is always [Publica](https://publica.ch/) for EPFL employees.
> Money is blocked until you retire, "permanently" leave the country, use it to buy a house, or use it to start a company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second pillar is also mandatory retirement savings, taken out of the salary, but for yourself.
The provider is always [PUBLICA](https://publica.ch/) for EPFL employees.
Money is blocked until you retire, "permanently" leave the country, use it to buy a house, or use it to start a company.
```

worth clarifying what "permanently" means here perhaps

Author: Good idea. I think some form of "your permit isn't renewed" would be a good succinctness/precision tradeoff, but I'm not sure how to phrase this without sounding negative (you effectively get to influence this by getting a job in Switzerland, so it's not like you'll be kicked out)

Reviewer: Don't you have to declare by yourself that you are "permanently" leaving the country?

First pillar [from ch.ch](https://www.ch.ch/en/retirement/oasi-pension-abroad/): “If Switzerland does not have a social security agreement with the country where you live that provides for your pension to be paid to you there, when you leave Switzerland you are only entitled to an interest-free refund of what you and your employer(s) have paid into the OASI fund. If you have to apply for this refund, you will find the form and the information you require on the website of the Swiss Compensation Office in Geneva.”

Second pillar [from PUBLICA](https://www.publica.ch/en/my-pension/life-events/moving-abroad): “Please tell us if you are planning to leave Switzerland for good, and read our page on information requirements.”

Author: Yeah... and given that the agreements change all the time, I guess I'll just add a vague sentence.

You can view this as an investment with a high return since its tax-deductible nature drastically lowers your taxes.
The money is blocked under the same conditions as the second pillar.
You get to choose where you invest, so it can be a near-zero-return but safe option (e.g. 100% cash), or up to 100% in stocks with, e.g., VIAC or PostFinance. 
Make sure you compare fees before choosing a solution: keeping it in cash should be free everywhere, but if you want to invest, your bank’s offering probably won’t be the cheapest.
At withdrawal, a progressive tax rate is applied depending on the capital amount and your canton of residence. ([source](https://finpension.ch/en/capital-withdrawal-tax-compared/))

There are retirement accounts called "Pillar 3b" which are not tax deductible. Salespeople will try to convince you these are useful, but they are most likely wrong.

## Taxes

The general principles of Swiss taxation are:
- Your income and your wealth are subject to taxation, no matter where you earned or store them in the world.

> - Taxes are levied by the federal government, by cantons, and by communes, but the tax declaration is a single online form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Taxes are levied by the federal government, cantons, and communes, but the tax declaration is a single online form.
```

No repeated preposition needed in English, unlike French :p

- If you are married, you must file jointly.
- Permanent residents must pay an advance on their taxes each month, while non-permanent residents have their taxes deducted directly from their salary.
- The tax authorities will help you as long as you are honest, never lie nor try to hide money, and do not try to find loopholes or technicalities.
- If you realize you filed something incorrectly, or forgot to declare something, it's always better to contact the tax authorities yourself than wait for them to find out.

> ⚠️ The remainder of this page is a helpful guide to common taxable items and deductions _in the canton of Vaud_, not tax advice about your personal situation.

> > You should still read every field in the tax form at least once to ensure you do not forget anything.

Reviewer: Hmm, that's a blockquote, which might serve the visual purpose but is the wrong semantic element. I think putting the whole paragraph in italics might be better. Plus maybe another warning emoji at the end too.

> If you have a B permit but do not meet one of the criteria explained at the beginning of this page, typically because you have a 3a pillar, you must request an "ulterior ordinary taxation", or TOU "taxation ordinaire ultérieure" in French.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a B permit and (i) you make more than 120k, or (ii) your wealth is over 50k, or (iii) you have undeclared revenue—typically because you have a 3a pillar—you must request an "ulterior ordinary taxation", or "taxation ordinaire ultérieure" (TOU) in French.
```

Reviewer: I don't want to scroll to the top and then find my place again

Author: Fair. Also the sentence is wrong anyway, I intended to make a clear separation between optional and mandatory TOU (with a 3a it's still technically optional even if not filing one is pretty stupid)

The form to request one is on the [Vaud website](https://www.vd.ch/themes/etat-droit-finances/impots/pour-les-employeurs/impot-a-la-source/personnes-imposees-a-la-source-sourciers/).

> Once this is done, you keep being taxed at the source but you follow the procedure detailed next to declare your taxes.
> This cannot be undone, once requested you will declare your taxes every year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once this is done, you keep being taxed at the source, but you have to follow the procedure described below to file your taxes.
Opting for a TOU cannot be undone. Once requested, you will have to file your taxes every year.
```

If you have to file your taxes because you requested so (above) or because you are a permanent resident, you will receive a letter when tax season comes.
This letter contains identifiers for [VaudTax](https://www.vd.ch/themes/etat-droit-finances/impots/impots-pour-les-individus/remplir-ma-declaration-dimpot/prestation-vaudtax/), a website which is basically a giant form.

> **VaudTax offers a "simulation" mode** that does not need identifiers, with which you can use to decide whether requesting a TOU is worth it or not if you are not legally required to do so but wonder whether you could benefit from extra deductions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**VaudTax offers a "simulation" mode** that does not need identifiers, which you can use to decide whether requesting a TOU is worth it if you are not legally required to do so but are wondering whether you could benefit from extra deductions.
```

Remember that switching to a TOU is permanent, so your situation in terms of deductions should be stable long-term.

> Before opening VaudTax, get the following documents and information, so that filing your taxes becomes a quick 15 minutes affair:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before opening VaudTax, get the following documents and information, so that filing your taxes becomes a quick 15-minute affair:
```

> - The letter you got from the tax office that includes your "n° de contribuable" and "code de contrôle" identifiers (the latter changes each year)

Reviewer: Oops! Looks like you're using the degree symbol (U+00B0 "Degree Sign") to write the abbreviated form of the word *numéro*. Instead, the typographically correct symbol to use is the superscript lowercase o (U+1D52 "Modifier Letter Small O"), as follows: nᵒ. ([source](https://french.stackexchange.com/questions/41992/which-glyphs-should-be-used-to-represent-the-word-numero-n-n-or#41996), for example)

Author: Damn, good thing you spotted this before the Unicode police caught me! It's too bad Swiss keyboards have the former and not the latter.

- Your salary certificate from EPFL's SESAME portal
- For each bank account you had on the 31st of December of the elapsed year (in any country/currency), the account number, amount of money there was on the account on that date, and the interest you earned for the year
  - If you opened that account in the elapsed year, you additionally need the opening date
  - For investment accounts, you additionally need the statements showing share purchases, share sales, and dividends received during the year
  - If your bank provides an "e-Relevé fiscal", get it, it's a machine-readable version of this information and will save you time
- For each bank account you closed during the elapsed year, the account number and closing date
- The amount of money you paid for health insurance in the elapsed year (typically your health insurance gives you a PDF at the end of the year)
- The amount of money you paid for rent, _without_ "charges" (this should be in your rental contract)
- If you have a 3a pillar, the PDF from your bank stating how much money you put in for the year

> Some help to file the most common items in VaudTax, after you've logged in with your n° de contribuable and code de contrôle (_not_ in simulation mode):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some help to file the most common items in VaudTax, after you've logged in with your "nᵒ de contribuable" and "code de contrôle" (_not_ in simulation mode):
```

- ⚠️ Most of the boxes for numbers do not accept cents, but may screw up your copy/paste and include the cents but not the separator, leading to e.g. 1000 instead of 10.00, so double-check what you paste.
- If you already filed your taxes last year, start by importing your previous data using the "Importer une déclaration" link on the right
- If your bank gave you an "e-Relevé fiscal", import it using the link on the right.
- Fill in "Identification", being very careful about the IBAN because that is the account you will get the tax refund on.

> - Fill in "Contribuable 1", as well as the second one if you are married.

Reviewer: None of the other bullet points have periods at the end

- In the right sidebar, under "Outils" > "Gérer des pièces justificatives", in the second group you must upload your 3a certificate for the year, if applicable; nothing else
- You can then check the entire computation using "Outils" in the right sidebar > "Calculer les impôts".
  - For a full year in Switzerland of an average PhD student with a 3a pillar maxed out for the year, the taxes should be 2.5-3k, and the "solde" should be _negative_ 2-2.5k, meaning they owe you money back
  - Without a 3a pillar your "solde" will typically be around zero or even positive, so there is usually no point in doing a "taxation ordinaire ultérieure" in that case unless you have to
- You can then finish by clicking on "Transmettre" in the right sidebar > "Vérifier..." and clicking on the confirmation buttons
  - Once it's done, download all three documents you can download: two are PDF statements, and the remaining one is data that you can import next year so you only need to input changes

After a delay from a few weeks to a year, a taxation decision will be made and you get refunded (or charged, if you had not paid enough).

> While it is technically possible for taxation decisions to last more than a year, this should not happen in normal situations, and you have not heard back by the next calendar year you should contact the tax authorities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is technically possible for taxation decisions to take more than a year, this should not happen in normal situations, and if you have not heard back by the next calendar year, you should contact the tax authorities.
```
